DEVIN EGGER: We have
Accessibility on Social Media -
Why You Should Be Thinking About
It, from Sam Alderson,
social media strategist at Yoast.
Sam, take it away.
SAM ALDERSON: Welcome,
if you're interested in accessibility
in social media then
you’re in the right place.
My name is Sam and I work for a
little WordPress called Yoast.
You'll find me on most of the
networks and I’m Good Plan, Sam
and I'm obsessed with
social and accessibility.
Let's look at today's
topics I am going to cover.
I can't stress enough that
there is so much more to this
than I can cover in today's talk.
I just want the cogs
turning and you thinking
about social
accessibility in media.
Why is this important?
People use social media daily,
and for me accessibility
at its absolute core
is about people.
Online accessibility is finally
starting to get a lot more attention
and that the people who use the
Internet are very different.
They access content and
services in different ways.
And I hope that if you take
one thing away from this is
to remember not to make
assumptions about those people
who are coming to
consume your content.
I'm going to share with you
how you can give your users,
readers, customers a choice
while designing for a diversity
of experiences and providing
different ways for people
to participate
and interact with your content.
Offering your content in this way
means more users, more retweets,
followers, likes, link clicks.
Just to give you an idea
about how people interact
with social media here’s some fun
numbers because we all love stats.
Facebook reported in 2016, 85% of
people watch videos without sound.
They also found that 80%
of people who watch videos
with captions are more likely
to watch the entire video.
Similarly, YouTube found that
videos with captions had 10 percent
more view time.
The point is not that
captions are important,
though don’t get me wrong,
they definitely are.
It's that different people
consume content in different ways
and have different needs.
When you tweet, share or interact
in social media you cannot be sure
that the person on the other
side will fully understand
what you’ve sent.
And if the person cannot see,
read or engage with that content,
then you need to be
doing something about it.
You may be thinking, Yes,
Sam, I know all this already.
Where do I start?
Let's start with images.
A lot of what we do on the
social team at Yoast is visual
and designed to convey
a specific information.
For example, we use images to
tell a story, to convey a message
or to get people to take an action.
There are numerous, different
people consuming our content
in different ways who
have different challenges.
I have to say, though,
we have an outstanding design team
at Yoast that keeps everyone in
check when it comes to accessibility,
so a huge pops [phonetic]
to them.
What are some of the basics
to take into consideration
when it comes to images.
There are specific challenges that
come around with colour and contrast.
For example, you shouldn’t rely on
colour alone to convey a message.
If some of your audience was
colorblind, then the key information
in this chart may be
lost or change meaning.
This Instagram post relies on me
being able to see red versus green,
and to understand that green is
good, and red is bad.
But that the green is
also half of this chart.
This also relies on the cultural
context that red being bad
and green being good
which is not universal.
To make this post more
accessible, we need
to label the key information
we want to get across.
That's better.
See how we’ve added
the percentages.
They may be small but it’s
something to keep in mind.
But this is more about catering
to those who are colorblind.
The colours that we use
in their relationships
to each other is also something
you need to take into account.
We can't assume that people see
images the same way that a person
with 20/20 vision sees them.
But thinking about
contrast can help.
I have taken most of the
color out of this image to see
how some people may experience it.
You can still identify
the key parts.
The message still makes
sense, but it's not perfect.
The contrast is not great
near the bottom of the image.
However, the key information
is still readable,
and the text is still readable.
This brings me on
to text in images.
It’s something, again,
that we do a lot at Yoast.
Almost all of our posts have
complex images with text on it.
There are guidelines and tools
that you can use to ensure
that the contrast ratios
of your text is sufficient
against the background colour.
Do note, though, there are
minimum contrast ratios based
on the different sizes of the
fonts that you use, so, be aware.
Other things to be mindful
of is that the text
in the image is inaccessible
to screen readers.
It's best practice to include
that text that’s in the image
in the caption of your post.
Next, let’s consider alt text.
This is text that is read aloud
by assistive technologies.
Images fall into three different
categories when it comes to alt text.
On social media, first, at least,
it's almost always informative.
First,
we have the informative images.
These are the ones
that convey meaning.
Next you have functional images.
Those have a specific role or
purpose, for example, a logo.
And then you have the decorative
ones, and these are just for show.
W3C has a handy decision tree that
you can use to help you figure out
which categories your
images fall into.
But social media is
almost always informative.
When it comes to alt text
what do you need to do.
There are a few best practices to
keep in mind when writing them.
Keeping it short is best,
writing proper sentences
and generally around 125 to 140
characters is the best way to go.
It’s effectively a short Tweet.
There are some platforms that
provide you with a lot of room
to write your alt text.
Twitter, for example, let’s
you write a thousand characters
if you really want to.
And with the surge of AI
images, this amount
of space can be super helpful.
All social platforms have this
function to add the alt text images,
and I will show you
where you can find those.
I'm going to share with you an
example of an Instagram post
from a while ago from our account.
Here we go.
This is now available.
Yoast SEO is now
available in Shopify.
Basically,
it’s the text in the image.
While it’s fine to actually
describe the image itself,
there is important context here
that we haven’t communicated
so let’s add some more.
Here you can see now we
have the text in the image
and a brief description
of the image itself.
But we could go further.
That’s much better.
Do you see how adding extra layers
and context builds the picture.
You can prove this even further,
but this is much of an art
as it is a science,
so filling in something basic
is better than not doing it at all.
It gets you into the habit at
least of filling in these fields.
Remember that you have the
context of your images and photos.
Describe them as if you
are talking to someone
who has never seen them before.
Utilize that.
Here are best practices to
keep in mind when it comes
to alt text [on screen].
Take screenshots.
Now we know what you should be
writing, but where do you add this.
This can, obviously, be done
directly in the platforms itself
and some [scheduling]
services are now catching up and
actually adding this functionality
as well.
I'm going to show you quickly how
to add an alt text to your images.
On Twitter you compose
your tweet like normal.
You see that in the bottom,
right-hand corner you have
the alt text button.
You can write your description in
there and then you can save it.
This will show that the
image has an alt attribute.
This has to be done
before you tweet.
Do remember that.
You cannot edit
this after the fact.
One great thing that Twitter has
introduced is that you can turn
on a notification that will
remind you to add an alt attribute
before you actually
tweet your tweet.
If you are tweeting out a photo, it
will remind you to add that alt text.
It’s a big win.
On Instagram it's a bit hidden.
It’s in the advanced settings
so once you go there you need
to then fill it in and save it,
but you can edit this after posting.
On Facebook there's an AI
that can do this for you,
but it can get it wrong.
That's a practice to
actually write it yourself.
AI alt attributes are rarely good.
They may do a reasonable job of
identifying what’s in the picture,
but they lack your context.
Let's talk videos,
especially short form video.
They’re only getting bigger.
I can do a whole talk about
that, but that's not for today.
We’re seeing that TikTok is heavily
influencing our content consumption,
and the other networks are
working hard to catch up.
Facebook recently added
its version of TikTok.
It’s the home feed.
Video is here to stay
from a social perspective.
It's good to remember that
YouTube is also a social network
with a huge and diverse audience
that have very high standards
and very little patience.
The small details matter.
There's a lot to consider
when it comes to videos
but one of the easier things that
you can do is to add captions,
also, titles to your videos.
But what's the difference?
Captions convey all the essential
audio, the dialogue, music,
sound effects.
They are intended for audiences
who cannot hear the audio.
Subtitles, however,
convey the dialogue only.
They are intended for
an audience who can hear
but not understand the audio.
On social media these tend
to use interchangeably.
But outside of that they use
for more specific reasons.
There also two types of
captions that you can use.
You have the closed captions, meaning
a user can turn them on and off
which gives them the choice.
Or you have open captions
which actually are burnt
into the video themselves, that
sometimes this can cause problems
with subtitles actually
overlaying them.
Every single platform has the ability
for you to add closed captions
to your videos.
Though sometimes they are
not formatted the best.
Let's do a bit of a quick rundown.
It's also worth noting that
subtitles make translation
and localization a lot easier.
YouTube can do this automatically,
however, you must review these.
This is not 100% accurate.
You need to pay attention to
the wording and the timings,
especially if the person
talking has a thick accent.
You can also upload an SRT file or
paste in a script if there is one.
This will give you a much
more accurate result.
Programs like the
script are a great help.
Twitter can do it automatically,
but its hit and miss so stick
with uploading the captions to
their Twitter media library.
Instagram and TikTok also have
options to do closed captions.
They are pretty accurate,
but you do need to edit them
to make sure
everything makes sense.
Instagram stories, however,
is not styled right
and they're not exposed
to screen readers,
so the text isn’t
available to everyone.
With Facebook, again, you can trust
the AI, but this can still be hit
or miss.
Review these once the video has
been processed or upload an SRT file
or the script to assure you
have them correct and concise.
Okay, we’re on the home straight.
And these three can be the
most annoying when it comes
to social media accessibility.
First, we have emojis.
Emojis have a text description
like an alt attribute meaning
that this is actually read
aloud by assistive programs.
This meme from a couple of
years ago is a great example
of how not to use emojis.
I perceive this visually
to be red flags.
However, a user with a screen reader
this says, I’m not on Twitter,
triangle flag, triangle flag,
you get my point.
If you’re going to use emojis,
make sure you use them at the end
of your copy or if
it’s between sentences,
make sure they have context.
When it comes to hashtags,
please use CamelCase.
Basically,
capitalizing each word in the tag.
It helps the word to breathe when
read aloud by assistive technologies.
It also means screen readers will
read it out as singular words
as opposed to one contained word.
Here's an example of a hashtag
that has gone down in
social media history.
They still blow up as an
example of what not to do.
Also, note that acronyms
and initialisms like SEO,
should always be capitalized.
Custom fonts.
Oh, custom fonts.
Custom fonts were very
trendy back in the '90s.
They seem to have come back
into trend every now and then.
I don't know about you, but this
makes me really shake my head
when I see people do
this because it tells me
the person doing this really does
not understand accessibility at all.
Screen readers cannot
process this as text.
They will often mistake this for
math or worse they’ll just ignore it,
which means you're neglecting
a huge chunk of your audience.
This also goes for ASCII art.
While this is cute for me,
this is very exclusionary.
Please think about
this before you do it.
Think about the person who
is consuming your content.
I know that was a lot of information
in a short amount of time,
but this is something that we
should all be thinking about
in order to be inclusive.
This is only the tip
of the iceberg as well.
Like I said at the beginning,
there is a lot to this,
but once you know, you
know, and you start spotting
all the people doing
these mistakes.
Here are just a few
takeaways from this talk
and I hope you're enjoying the rest
of the WordPress accessibility today.
Thanks for listening.